rfcs/2021-05-24-newlines.md, before:

- Feature: 2021-05-24-newlines
- RFC PR: https://github.com/gordonbrander/subtext/pull/8
- Issue: https://github.com/gordonbrander/subtext/issues/4

# Summary

Specify newlines in Subtext.

# Motivation

Different systems use different character(s) for breaking lines. To ensure a standardized parsing and understanding of Subtext, we must specify how Subtext should treat various kinds of line breaks. Additionally, [Subtext is UTF-8](https://github.com/gordonbrander/subtext/blob/main/specification.md#mime-type-and-extension), so we need to think about all those extended UTF line break characters.

Important to consider:

- Unix uses `\n` (LF) to break lines
- Windows uses `\r\n` (CRLF) to break lines

Less important, because less common:

- Classic Mac, Lisp Machines, and a few other ancient systems use `\r` (CR) to break lines
- All those funky UTF-8 varietals

# Guide-level explanation

Different systems use different character(s) for breaking lines. In particular:

- Unix uses `\n` to break lines
- Windows uses `\r\n` to break lines

In addition, [Unicode](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Newline#Unicode) specifies a number of other line-breaking characters.

Subtext authors shouldn't have to worry about this detail, but Subtext parsers and clients need a strategy for coping with these differences.

Influenced by https://github.com/golang/go/issues/16355, Subtext brings a bit of opinion to the problem in order to simplify it:

- Subtext should use Unix-style line-endings.
- Subtext parsers will happily *read* either Windows-style or Unix-style line-endings (`\r\n`, or `\n`).
- Subtext compilers will only *write* Unix-style line-endings (`\n`).

Here we follow [Postel's Robustness Principle](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Robustness_principle), to a degree.

The right way to write Subtext is with Unix-style endings. Windows editors can be configured to write Unix-style line-endings. But it will work if you work on Windows and don't know that.

# Reference-level explanation

Different systems use different character(s) for breaking lines. Because Subtext is line-oriented, it specifies a strategy for normalizing line breaks.

The canonical line-break for Subtext is `\n` (LF).

Human authors of Subtext SHOULD use `\n` to delimit lines.

Software that writes Subtext MUST use `\n` to delimit lines.

Subtext parsers MUST normalize newlines by interpreting `\r\n` (CRLF) and `\r` (CR) as equivalent to `\n`.

Other line break characters, including Unicode line-break characters such as `PS` and `LS` MUST NOT be treated as line delimiters for the purpose of Subtext parsing.

This strategy follows [Postel's Robustness Principle](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Robustness_principle), to a degree. We standardize on a single line-break character, but will parse the most widely used alternatives.

# Drawbacks

Opinionated formatting simplifies the implementation, and reduces the conceptual overhead, but may frustrate some power-users.

# Rationale and alternatives

Values:

- Keep it as simple as possible
- Reduce variation in the ecosystem
- Be robust to mistakes
- Don't confuse new users with surprising footguns
- Being opinionated is ok

We also handle `\r` because it's ASCII and why not.

Alternatives:

- Allow any line-break, including UTF-8 line breaks. This would allow for any workflow, but force the parser to embody a lot of complexity.
- Allow Windows or Unix-style linebreaks. This would avoid imposing an opinion on either of the two largest computing ecosystems. On the other hand, it would in some sense "fork" best practice.

We think that accepting Windows line-breaks while encouraging, and only writing Unix-style line-breaks embodies a balance of simplicity and robustness.

# Prior art

- gofmt opionionatedly transforms all line endings to Unix-style line-endings https://github.com/golang/go/issues/16355
- Python's [universal newlines](https://docs.python.org/3/glossary.html#term-universal-newlines) treat `\n`, `\r\n`, and `\r` as newlines.

# Unresolved questions

...

# Future possibilities

...

# References

- [Newline Representation on Wikipedia](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Newline#Representation)

Commit message:

Notes on inconsistent Python newline treatment

rfcs/2021-05-24-newlines.md, after:

- Feature: 2021-05-24-newlines
- RFC PR: https://github.com/gordonbrander/subtext/pull/8
- Issue: https://github.com/gordonbrander/subtext/issues/4

# Summary

Specify newlines in Subtext.

# Motivation

Different systems use different character(s) for breaking lines. To ensure a standardized parsing and understanding of Subtext, we must specify how Subtext should treat various kinds of line breaks. Additionally, [Subtext is UTF-8](https://github.com/gordonbrander/subtext/blob/main/specification.md#mime-type-and-extension), so we need to think about all those extended UTF line break characters.

Important to consider:

- Unix uses `\n` (LF) to break lines
- Windows uses `\r\n` (CRLF) to break lines

Less important, because less common:

- Classic Mac, Lisp Machines, and a few other ancient systems use `\r` (CR) to break lines
- All those funky UTF-8 varietals

# Guide-level explanation

Different systems use different character(s) for breaking lines. In particular:

- Unix uses `\n` to break lines
- Windows uses `\r\n` to break lines

In addition, [Unicode](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Newline#Unicode) specifies a number of other line-breaking characters.

Subtext authors shouldn't have to worry about this detail, but Subtext parsers and clients need a strategy for coping with these differences.

Influenced by https://github.com/golang/go/issues/16355, Subtext brings a bit of opinion to the problem in order to simplify it:

- Subtext should use Unix-style line-endings.
- Subtext parsers will happily *read* either Windows-style or Unix-style line-endings (`\r\n`, or `\n`).
- Subtext compilers will only *write* Unix-style line-endings (`\n`).

Here we follow [Postel's Robustness Principle](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Robustness_principle), to a degree.

The right way to write Subtext is with Unix-style endings. Windows editors can be configured to write Unix-style line-endings. But it will work if you work on Windows and don't know that.

# Reference-level explanation

Different systems use different character(s) for breaking lines. Because Subtext is line-oriented, it specifies a strategy for normalizing line breaks.

The canonical line-break for Subtext is `\n` (LF).

Human authors of Subtext SHOULD use `\n` to delimit lines.

Software that writes Subtext MUST use `\n` to delimit lines.

Subtext parsers MUST normalize newlines by interpreting `\r\n` (CRLF) and `\r` (CR) as equivalent to `\n`.

Other line break characters, including Unicode line-break characters such as `PS` and `LS` MUST NOT be treated as line delimiters for the purpose of Subtext parsing.

This strategy follows [Postel's Robustness Principle](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Robustness_principle), to a degree. We standardize on a single line-break character, but will parse the most widely used alternatives.

# Drawbacks

Opinionated formatting simplifies the implementation, and reduces the conceptual overhead, but may frustrate some power-users.

# Rationale and alternatives

Values:

- Keep it as simple as possible
- Reduce variation in the ecosystem
- Be robust to mistakes
- Don't confuse new users with surprising footguns
- Being opinionated is ok

We also handle `\r` because it's ASCII and why not.

Alternatives:

- Allow any line-break, including UTF-8 line breaks. This would allow for any workflow, but force the parser to embody a lot of complexity.
- Allow Windows or Unix-style linebreaks. This would avoid imposing an opinion on either of the two largest computing ecosystems. On the other hand, it would in some sense "fork" best practice.

We think that accepting Windows line-breaks while encouraging, and only writing Unix-style line-breaks embodies a balance of simplicity and robustness.

# Prior art

- gofmt opionionatedly transforms all line endings to Unix-style line-endings https://github.com/golang/go/issues/16355
- Python's [universal newlines](https://docs.python.org/3/glossary.html#term-universal-newlines) treat `\n`, `\r\n`, and `\r` as newlines.
    - Python's `file.readlines()` iterates by Python Universal Newlines.
    - However, Python's `str.splitlines()` splits on both on Python Universal Newlines and on a range of Unicode newline characters. This has created some confusion [and disagreement around how to resolve among Python core team](https://discuss.python.org/t/changing-str-splitlines-to-match-file-readlines/174/14).

# Unresolved questions

...

# Future possibilities

...

# References

- [Newline Representation on Wikipedia](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Newline#Representation)
