explorations/2021-05-27-poetry.md, before:

- Feature: 2021-05-27-poetry
- RFC PR: https://github.com/gordonbrander/subtext/pull/11

# Summary

Poetry, linebreaks, and logical grouping.

# Motivation

In this doc we explore different ways of handling logical grouping and line breaks in Subtext.

Subtext as currently specified maps line-oriented text to block-oriented markup. Linebreaks map to paragraph breaks. Empty lines are treated as non-markup.

Consider: Subtext cannot presently present poetry. This isn't a dealbreaker, but it does seem unfortunate.

Consider: we prefer to "pretty print" text with empty lines between blocks, except list blocks, when rendering. This hints at a mismatch between Subtext's data model vs human-preferred writing style. The mismatch can be papered over via a "pretty-print" renderer, but the behavior should be specified, and deserves further consideration of tradeoffs.

Besides leaving behavior as is, and specifying pretty-printing, there are several other ways we could approach:

- Semantic blank lines: Blank lines could be maintained in parsed Subtext and honored in output. This would allow for some additional flexibility in text formatting.
- Grouped lines: Where most languages parse into an abstract syntax tree (AST), Subtext is currently a flat list of typed blocks. However, we could maintain this property, while assigning lines broken by blank lines into logical groups.
- Preformatting toggle: an opening/closing marker for preformatted text blocks. This could be paired with either approach above.

Taken in order...

# Semantic blank lines

```
Some text
More text

- List item
- List item

More text


The end
```

Would be parsed to the following AST pseudocode:

```
(text "Some text")
(text "More text")
(break)
(list-item "List item")
(list-item "List item")
(break)
(text "More text")
(break)
(break)
(text "The end")
```

Benefits:

- Simplest thing that could work.
- Simplifies rendering code.
- Allows for more flexible formatting. For example, some poetry employs many contiguous line breaks.
- Text roundtripped through parse->render remains the same

Drawbacks:

- No "semantic grouping" for things like lists. I would say this is both a benefit and a drawback!
- Mapping to an AST language like HTML is a bit trickier, but not too difficult. Anyway, it makes the HTML renderer shoulder the complexity of HTML, rather than embodying AST complexity in the basic parser.

I am partial to the radical simplicity of this approach.

Note that the parsed blocks may be treated by clients as a token stream and transformed into a more complex Abstract Syntax Tree if desired.


# Grouped lines

```
Some text
More text

- List item
- List item

> A quote
More text


The end
```

Would be parsed to the following AST pseudocode:

```
(text ("Some text" "More text"))
(list ("List item" "List item"))
(quote ("More text"))
(text ("More text"))
(text ("The end"))
```

The rule is that contiguous blocks of the same type are combined into one. Clients can choose how to render the block parts. For example

Benefits:

- Semantic grouping can be nice. Lists are now a unified block, for example.

Drawbacks:

- Text roundtripped through parse->render may not be the same. Multiple blank lines will be collapsed. I would say this is both a benefit and a drawback!
- You will not be able to use multiple contiguous line breaks, for example, in poetry.

Additional notes:

- Relatively simple implementation using the equivalent of Python's groupby, so implemenation complexity is not an impediment.
- Another consideration is how this might play with indentation later on. Certainly possible, but may require a simple lookahead shift-reduce parser. I am not fond of hierarchical indentation, but I also don't want to paint myself into a corner there.

# Preformatting tag

Preformatting could be accomlished with a preformatting tag, perhaps three backticks, like Github-flavored Markdown. After encountering this tag, the parser would concatenate all lines it receives, verbatim, until it encounters a closing flag, at which point, it assigns the concatenated lines to a Preformatted block and returns to normal parsing.

The preformatting tag can be considered together with, or independently of the two other proposals.

Benefits:

- This would allow for maximal flexibility in formatting.
- Whitespace could be honored. It may also provide an escape hatch for embedded code, although we strongly prefer the approach of transcluding and pretty-printing real code files.

Drawbacks:

- Introduces a new concept to the language that is not line-oriented.
- It is possible to write broken preformatting, by forgetting the closing tag.

Notes:

- Unclear how this would play with indentation if we ever introduced it. Perhaps the flag would be required to be at indentation level 0.


# Prior art

- Semantic blank lines is what [Gemini](https://gemini.circumlunar.space/docs/specification.gmi) does. Going this route would make Subtext very similar to Gemini, although there are differences in surface syntax, and, in future, probably a few features.
- [Gemini](https://gemini.circumlunar.space/docs/specification.gmi) also has a preformatting tag.


# Unresolved questions

...

# Future possibilities

...

Commit message:

Add further notes on preformatted content

explorations/2021-05-27-poetry.md, after:

- Feature: 2021-05-27-poetry
- RFC PR: https://github.com/gordonbrander/subtext/pull/11

# Summary

Poetry, linebreaks, and logical grouping.

# Motivation

In this doc we explore different ways of handling logical grouping and line breaks in Subtext.

Subtext as currently specified maps line-oriented text to block-oriented markup. Linebreaks map to paragraph breaks. Empty lines are treated as non-markup.

Consider: Subtext cannot presently present poetry. This isn't a dealbreaker, but it does seem unfortunate.

Consider: we prefer to "pretty print" text with empty lines between blocks, except list blocks, when rendering. This hints at a mismatch between Subtext's data model vs human-preferred writing style. The mismatch can be papered over via a "pretty-print" renderer, but the behavior should be specified, and deserves further consideration of tradeoffs.

It also seems likely that users in need of more line-break control will hack around this limitation using `.`, redundant space characters, etc.

# Approaches

Besides leaving behavior as is, and specifying pretty-printing, there are several other ways we could approach:

- Semantic blank lines: Blank lines could be maintained in parsed Subtext and honored in output. This would allow for some additional flexibility in text formatting.
- Grouped lines: Where most languages parse into an abstract syntax tree (AST), Subtext is currently a flat list of typed blocks. However, we could maintain this property, while assigning lines broken by blank lines into logical groups.
- Preformatting toggle: an opening/closing marker for preformatted text blocks. This could be paired with either approach above.
- Specifying that transcluded text (`.txt`) files should be treated as preformatted text. This feels in line with Subtext's ethos of letting other file formats be the escape hatch for complex features. It could be paired with any of the approaches above.

Taken in order...

## Semantic blank lines

```
Some text
More text

- List item
- List item

More text


The end
```

Would be parsed to the following AST pseudocode:

```
(text "Some text")
(text "More text")
(break)
(list-item "List item")
(list-item "List item")
(break)
(text "More text")
(break)
(break)
(text "The end")
```

Benefits:

- Simplest thing that could work.
- Simplifies rendering code.
- Allows for more flexible formatting. For example, some poetry employs many contiguous line breaks.
- Text roundtripped through parse->render remains the same

Drawbacks:

- No "semantic grouping" for things like lists. I would say this is both a benefit and a drawback!
- Mapping to an AST language like HTML is a bit trickier, but not too difficult. Anyway, it makes the HTML renderer shoulder the complexity of HTML, rather than embodying AST complexity in the basic parser.

I am partial to the radical simplicity of this approach.

Note that the parsed blocks may be treated by clients as a token stream and transformed into a more complex Abstract Syntax Tree if desired.


## Grouped lines

```
Some text
More text

- List item
- List item

> A quote
More text


The end
```

Would be parsed to the following AST pseudocode:

```
(text ("Some text" "More text"))
(list ("List item" "List item"))
(quote ("More text"))
(text ("More text"))
(text ("The end"))
```

The rule is that contiguous blocks of the same type are combined into one. Clients can choose how to render the block parts. For example

Benefits:

- Semantic grouping can be nice. Lists are now a unified block, for example.

Drawbacks:

- Text roundtripped through parse->render may not be the same. Multiple blank lines will be collapsed. I would say this is both a benefit and a drawback!
- You will not be able to use multiple contiguous line breaks, for example, in poetry.

Additional notes:

- Relatively simple implementation using the equivalent of Python's groupby, so implemenation complexity is not an impediment.
- Another consideration is how this might play with indentation later on. Certainly possible, but may require a simple lookahead shift-reduce parser. I am not fond of hierarchical indentation, but I also don't want to paint myself into a corner there.

# Preformatting tag

Preformatting could be accomlished with a preformatting tag, perhaps three backticks, like Github-flavored Markdown. After encountering this tag, the parser would concatenate all lines it receives, verbatim, until it encounters a closing flag, at which point, it assigns the concatenated lines to a Preformatted block and returns to normal parsing.

The preformatting tag can be considered together with, or independently of the two other proposals.

Benefits:

- This would allow for maximal flexibility in formatting.
- Whitespace could be honored. It may also provide an escape hatch for embedded code, although we strongly prefer the approach of transcluding and pretty-printing real code files.

Drawbacks:

- Introduces a new concept to the language that is not line-oriented.
- It is possible to write broken preformatting, by forgetting the closing tag.

Notes:

- Unclear how this would play with indentation if we ever introduced it. Perhaps the flag would be required to be at indentation level 0.

## Treat transcluded text files as preformatted content

Treating transcluded `.txt` files as preformatted text would allow for complex text structures sometimes seen in poetry.

We should specify this as a SHOULD for clients that transclude text content.

# Prior art

- Semantic blank lines is what [Gemini](https://gemini.circumlunar.space/docs/specification.gmi) does. Going this route would make Subtext very similar to Gemini, although there are differences in surface syntax, and, in future, probably a few features.
- [Gemini](https://gemini.circumlunar.space/docs/specification.gmi) also has a preformatting tag.


# Unresolved questions

...

# Future possibilities

...
