- Feature: 2021-05-27-poetry
- RFC PR: (fill me in with link to PR)
- Issue: (fill me in with link to issue, if any)

# Summary

Poetry, linebreaks, and logical grouping.

# Motivation

In this doc we explore different ways of handling logical grouping and line breaks in Subtext.

Subtext as currently specified maps line-oriented text to block-oriented markup. Linebreaks map to paragraph breaks. Empty lines are treated as non-markup.

Consider: Subtext cannot presently present poetry. This isn't a dealbreaker, but it does seem unfortunate.

Consider: we prefer to "pretty print" text with empty lines between blocks (except list blocks) rendering. This hints at a small mismatch between Subtext's data model, and its preferred writing style. The mismatch can be papered over via a "prettyprint" renderer, but this behavior should be specified, and deserves further consideration of tradeoffs.

- Semantic blank lines: Blank lines could be maintained in parsed Subtext and honored in output. This would allow for some additional flexibility in text formatting.
- Grouped lines: Where most languages parse into an abstract syntax tree (AST), Subtext is currently a flat list of typed blocks. However, we could maintain this property, while assigning lines broken by blank lines into logical groups.
- Preformatting toggle: an opening/closing marker for preformatted text blocks. This could be paired with either approach above.

Taken in order...

# Semantic blank lines

```
Some text
More text

- List item
- List item

More text


The end
```

Would be parsed to the following AST pseudocode:

```
(text "Some text")
(text "More text")
(break)
(list-item "List item")
(list-item "List item")
(break)
(text "More text")
(break)
(break)
(text "The end")
```

Benefits:

- Simplest thing that could work.
- Simplifies rendering code.
- Allows for more flexible formatting. For example, some poetry employs many contiguous line breaks.
- Text roundtripped through parse->render remains the same

Drawbacks:

- No "semantic grouping" for things like lists. I would say this is both a benefit and a drawback!
- Mapping to an AST language like HTML is a bit trickier, but not too difficult. Anyway, it makes the HTML renderer shoulder the complexity of HTML, rather than embodying AST complexity in the basic parser.

I am partial to the radical simplicity of this approach.

Note that the parsed blocks may be treated by clients as a token stream and transformed into a more complex Abstract Syntax Tree if desired.


# Grouped lines

```
Some text
More text

- List item
- List item

> A quote
More text


The end
```

Would be parsed to the following AST pseudocode:

```
(text ("Some text" "More text"))
(list ("List item" "List item"))
(quote ("More text"))
(text ("More text"))
(text ("The end"))
```

The rule is that contiguous blocks of the same type are combined into one. Clients can choose how to render the block parts. For example

Benefits:

- Semantic grouping can be nice. Lists are now a unified block, for example.

Drawbacks:

- Text roundtripped through parse->render may not be the same. Multiple blank lines will be collapsed. I would say this is both a benefit and a drawback!
- You will not be able to use multiple contiguous line breaks, for example, in poetry.

Additional notes:

- Relatively simple implementation using the equivalent of Python's groupby, so implemenation complexity is not an impediment.
- Another consideration is how this might play with indentation later on. Certainly possible, but may require a simple lookahead shift-reduce parser. I am not fond of hierarchical indentation, but I also don't want to paint myself into a corner there.

# Preformatting tag

Preformatting could be accomlished with a preformatting tag, perhaps three backticks, like Github-flavored Markdown. After encountering this tag, the parser would concatenate all lines it receives, verbatim, until it encounters a closing flag, at which point, it assigns the concatenated lines to a Preformatted block and returns to normal parsing.

The preformatting tag can be considered together with, or independently of the two other proposals.

Benefits:

- This would allow for maximal flexibility in formatting.
- Whitespace could be honored. It may also provide an escape hatch for embedded code, although we strongly prefer the approach of transcluding and pretty-printing real code files.

Drawbacks:

- Introduces a new concept to the language that is not line-oriented.
- It is possible to write broken preformatting, by forgetting the closing tag.

Notes:

- Unclear how this would play with indentation if we ever introduced it. Perhaps the flag would be required to be at indentation level 0.


# Prior art

- Semantic blank lines is what [Gemini](https://gemini.circumlunar.space/docs/specification.gmi) does. Going this route would make Subtext very similar to Gemini, although there are differences in surface syntax, and, in future, probably a few features.
- [Gemini](https://gemini.circumlunar.space/docs/specification.gmi) also has a preformatting tag.


# Unresolved questions

...

# Future possibilities

...